---
slug: virtual-reality-and-mental-health
title: Virtual Reality and Mental Health
authors: titilayo
tags: [Mental health, Virtual reality, Phobia, Anxiety]
---

This article while having not undergone a scientific research is
targeted at providing the relevance of tech in promoting mental health
amongst individuals of different age, sex and even race.

<!--truncate-->

NOTE: While this may seem to prove that there is confirmation of this
article being biased towards a class of the population, it would prove
to be a fun read and may even be a major break-through for researchers
in both the tech and mental health field to be able to carry out further
research.

Let's ride!!!!!

## Introduction
So many people may have watched the popular American science fiction
action film ***Ready Player One,*** which was released March 2018, based
on Ernest Cline's novel of the same name.

Directed by Steven Spielberg from a screenplay by Zak Penn and Cline, it
stars Tye Sheridan, Olivia Cooke, Ben Mendelsohn, Lena Waithe, T.J.
Miller, Simon Pegg and Mark Rylance.

The film is set in 2045, where much of humanity uses the OASIS,
a virtual reality simulation, to escape the real world. The orphaned
Wade Watts finds clues to a contest that promises the ownership of the
OASIS to the winner, and he and his allies try to complete it before an
evil corporation can do so.

Now you're probably wondering where I'm going with all this information
and how relevant is it. It gets more interesting.

So let's start by learning all about Virtual Reality and Mental Health.
However, to aid easy understanding, I'd like to focus more on
psychiatric individuals (this doesn't out rightly mean patients in a
psychiatric facility but individuals whom may need the expertise of
experts who work in psychiatry).

## What is Virtual Reality???

The term "virtual reality" is credited to Jaron Lanier, who was the
founder of VPL Research in 1984, a company that develops and sells
virtual reality products. The term "virtual reality," was first used in
the mid-1980s when Jaron Lanier, founder of VPL Research, began to
develop the gear, including goggles and gloves, needed to experience
what he called "virtual reality."

**Virtual Reality (VR)** is an advanced, human-computer interface that
simulates a realistic environment. The participants can move around in
the virtual world. They can see it from different angles, reach into it,
grab it and reshape it. There is no little screen of symbols for neither
manipulation nor commands to be entered to get the computer to do
something. 

**Cyberspace** is thought of as the ultimate virtual reality
environment. It is an alternative computer universe where data exists
like cities of light. Information workers use a special virtual reality
system to enter cyberspace and to travel its data highways. This gives
them the experience of being physically free to go anywhere.

Virtual Reality involves electronic and mechanical engineering,
cybernetics, database design, real-time and distributed systems,
simulation, computer graphics, human engineering, stereoscope, human
anatomy and, even, artificial life. The many challenges for creating
virtual reality systems include: software, hardware, human factors and
VR over high-speed networks.

## What is Mental Health??

Mental health refers to cognitive, behavioral, and emotional well-being.
It is all about how people think, feel, and behave. "Mental health is a
state of mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses
of life, realize their abilities, learn well and work well, and
contribute to their community."

People sometimes use the term "mental health" to mean the absence of a
mental disorder.

Having discussed these two concepts as much as I can to facilitate basic
understanding, I would like to focus more on certain aspects such as how
a *full immersive virtual reality* may help to prompt individuals with
*social phobia* to overcome their ineptness in a more subtle, controlled
and relaxing manner.

A Fully Immersive virtual reality ensures a realistic virtual
experience. It would feel as if you are physically present in the
virtual world and the events occurring there are happening to you.

Special equipment like VR glasses, gloves, body detectors equipped with
sense detectors is required to provide a realistic virtual experience.
The data from these sensors is used by the computer and the virtual
world responds to that in real-time to provide users with a realistic
virtual experience.

An example of this would be a Virtual Gaming Zone, where using special
gear you and other players can interact with the virtual environment,
all at the same time, and play with or against each other.

At the mention of virtual reality, the VR glasses in an arcade is the
most likely to pop into your mind because that's the place where most
people have likely experienced the virtual world but we can see from the
American science fiction action film ***Ready Player One*** by Steven
Spielberg and Cline that more can be done in the virtual world.

A fully immersive virtual reality like the one adapted in the movie
allows its users to customize not only their names but also allows them
to decide how they appear in the virtual world. More so, it allows you
to meet, interact and reach out to other people all the while not
altering normal functioning but rather allowing its users to choose
their environment and explore it like they normally would in reality.

It\'s normal to feel nervous in some social situations. For example,
going on a date or giving a presentation may cause that feeling of
butterflies in your stomach. But in social anxiety disorder, also called
*social phobia*, everyday interactions cause significant anxiety,
self-consciousness and embarrassment because you fear being scrutinized
or judged negatively by others.

In social anxiety disorder, fear and anxiety lead to avoidance that can
disrupt your life. Severe stress can affect your relationships, daily
routines, work, school or other activities.

Social anxiety disorder can be a chronic mental health condition, but
learning coping skills in psychotherapy and taking medications can help
you gain confidence and improve your ability to interact with others.

Anyone could be anxious socially which is perfectly fine but it also
means people with social phobia have little to no interaction or
relationships. Helping someone with a social phobia can most often prove
to be difficult thing to do as cases have their own level of extremity.

Then the question that would most likely be asked is how do we get
individuals with social anxiety disorder to come out of their own shell
and begin to open themselves up to others around them without being
forced and in an environment where they can easily engage a "flight
response"?

This is a question that I believe the introduction of virtual reality
may seek to proffer solution to, in that;

1.  They have the liberty to choose a unique name and identity for
    themselves and still be able to maintain their animosity in the
    virtual environment. For example, people who feel uncomfortable with
    their self-image can modify their physique, voice, skin color to
    what they want other people to perceive them as.

2.  They can select the scenery and elements that they want contained in
    the virtual environment i.e. they are able to select where they want
    visit. For example, someone who is scared of animals would be able
    to avoid places in the virtual environment that supports animals.

3.  They can choose the time that's most convenient for them to enter
    the virtual environment and also leave whether to interact with
    others or just to explore.

4.  The virtual environment also allows them to be able to control the
    presence of others in their space. They can choose to invite and
    reach out to any character of their choice while exerting control.

5.  The virtual environment also can allow people with social phobia to
    seek the professional help they need i.e. they can schedule their
    therapy sessions to take place in the virtual space and still be
    able to maintain animosity.

## Limitations of Virtual Reality

Virtual Reality (VR) is starting to be used in psychological therapy
around the world. However, a thorough understanding of the reason why VR
is effective and what effect it has on the human psyche is still
missing.

Also, the cost of acquiring a virtual reality gear is relatively high.
Certain parts of the world with unstable network connection and constant
power supply would heavily affect the methods described in the article.

In conclusion you would agree with me that this has proved to somewhat
good read and that tech is very useful in enhancing and supporting all
existing fields.

This article is open to constructive criticism and further suggestions
and improvements would be greatly appreciated. While there are limited
materials that supports my claim, the idea is that as times continue to
change, the tech space would be able to develop methods to help mental
health practitioners reach their audience, help people find it less
difficult to open up about their mental health issues and seek the
professional help they need while being able to control when, how they
get help and whom they seek help from.

## Supporting Links to Learn and find out more

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ready_Player_One_(film)>

<https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/social-anxiety-disorder/symptoms-causes/syc-20353561>

[In case you have not seen the movie and you are interested in watching
it](https://www.sabishare.com/file/ElTTlcTVQ93-ready-player-one-2018-netnaija-com-mp4)

## References
J. M. Zheng, K. W. Chan and I. Gibson, \"Virtual reality,\" in IEEE
Potentials, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 20-23, April-May 1998, doi:
10.1109/45.666641.